## Teamwork Basics

Summarize the following sections in the Teamwork Basics documents using your
own words and must provide examples using personal experience (at least two
group members) in this class or other classes or internships:

### Ground Rules: Norms 1 to norms 5

Setting some ground rules can help clearly lay out what to and what not to do
when working on assignments or communicating with the team.

1. **Work norms**: Who will do what and when is it due? Will anyone review it?
   These rules are the basis for completing any group assignment and must be
   made clear because not making these clear can make some members think the
   deadline is a different date or two members could do the same part.

2. **Facilitators Norms**: Will you use facilitators? Facilitators are people
   who will keep the team on track. They are the person who will chime in “Ok
   so what we are doing is…” clarifying the objective or “Guys if we finish
   this part now, we can go home early” motivating the group to stay on track.
   I once had a classmate in system-level that was like that and having a
   person who was clarifying what we did the last meet and what we needed to do
   during this one was beyond helpful. We were working on a library checkout
   program and sometimes during the meetings the group, myself included, would
   over focus on one part of the assignment that was about the book properties
   and she would always get the team to focus on the requirements. She also got
   the people in the group who weren’t very excited about the project to
   participate by asking them for input or their opinion on how the program
   should run.

3. **Communication Norms**: How will the group communicate? Email, GroupMe,
   etc.? Having everyone in a group chat can be helpful to facilitate
   communication. It can also help pass along the assignments to the leader.

4. **Meeting Norms**: When is a good time to meet and where? What if someone
   misses a lot of meetings? These can help provide structure because in
   previous groups when one person is not going to meetings you can tell them
   that the times are clearly laid out. Without it they probably felt no
   consequence because there was no clarification in the beginning that not
   going would be met with telling the professor or asking for a grade
   reduction.

5. **Consideration Norms**: Can people eat at meetings or smoke? Is everyone
   comfortable with the other team members? Making sure everyone is comfortable
   can help those teammates who are shy and may only provide input if the
   environment is not intimidating.

### Goals

Making sure that the whole team is on the same page in terms of the goal is
important because if one teammate is only concerned with passing and getting a
C or above and other members are working for an A there can be problems which
should be addressed in the beginning.

### Hints for Handling Difficult Behavior

If a teammate is too talkative, it can be due to their eagerness or they want
to show off their knowledge to the group. If they can’t take a hint that other
people would like to provide input, then you can use humor to stop him from
dominating the situation or you can talk to them privately about letting others
provide an equal amount of input.

If they are too quiet then you can make an effort to ask them questions about
themselves and tell them you appreciate any input they give. Personally, I know
that these people are the ones with good ideas for the project because they
have been listening the whole time.

If the person is very aggressive and critical then you either use those
critiques or tell them privately that their actions are having a negative
effect on the rest of the team and the assignment.

When you teammate complains a lot see if it is legitimate and if it is then
make changes to resolve those complaints but, if the complaints are not then
talk to them about helping you to solve the problem they have.

### Hints for Handling Group Problems

The whole group may come across problems that affect all members.

If the team is floundering and not really getting anything accomplished getting
a list of stuff to do can be very helpful. In my experience becoming a
facilitator and taking up the leadership role can help provide the group with
needed direction.

When the team is constantly getting distracted and going on tangents you can be
the one to say “Hey guys can you remind me about that one part of the
assignment” which was actually used in a group of mine in computer organisation
in order to discreetly get the group on topic.

If the group makes decisions too quickly then you can say things like “Are we
all in agreement about this?” because someone may pressure others to hurry up
and go ahead with the decision.

If the group doesn’t make any decisions try to get everyone to agree on a
common decision they all like. If they want different things, then you can
attempt to multivote. Multivoting is listing the choices and having members
rate them from best to worst and find similarities in the best ideas and try to
combine them.

When the team members are fighting between themselves you have to halt the work
and discuss with them using techniques from Hints for Handling Difficult
Behavior.

If someone is being ignored or ridiculed then they will not be able to provide
the team with input so all members must make a extra effort to work with each
other.

When a group members doesn’t want to do their share of work then you have to
talk with them and tell them their actions are detrimental to the group and in
my experience they have to be told this directly or they will ignore any
backhanded comments other teammates throw at them. Not being direct could get
them to not like you and resist doing the work even more.
